# Step 06 - Using an external vector store

In the previous step, we implemented a RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) pattern in our AI service using an
_in memory_ vector store. In this step, we will modify our AI service to use an external vector store.

If you want to see the final result of this step, you can check out the `step-06` directory.
Otherwise, let's get started!

## Vector store

There are many options to store the embeddings, like
[Infinispan](https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-stores/infinispan){target="_blank"},
[Pinecone](https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-stores/pinecone){target="_blank"},
[Qdrant](https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-stores/qdrant){target="_blank"},
specialized databases (like [Chroma](https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-stores/chroma){target="_blank"}), etc.
Here, we will use the [PostgreSQL pgVector store](https://docs.langchain4j.dev/integrations/embedding-stores/pgvector){target="_blank"},
a popular relational database. For simplicity, we will run the database with Docker or Podman. If you are not able to 
use Docker or Podman, you can skip this step and continue to use the in memory vector store.

### Configuring the vector store

==Add the following dependency to your `pom.xml` file:==

```xml title="pom.xml"
--8<-- "../../section-1/step-06/pom.xml:pgvector"
```

Now we will be able to use the [dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.pgvector.PgVectorEmbeddingStore](https://github.com/langchain4j/langchain4j/blob/main/langchain4j-pgvector/src/main/java/dev/langchain4j/store/embedding/pgvector/PgVectorEmbeddingStore.java) class to store and retrieve the embeddings.

Before we can use the `PgVectorEmbeddingStore` class, we need to configure it. ==In the 
`src/main/liberty/config` directory, create a file named `bootstrap.properties` with the following content:==

```properties title="bootstrap.properties"
--8<-- "../../section-1/step-06/src/main/liberty/config/bootstrap.properties"
```

Let's look at the configuration:

- `vector.store.hostname`: The hostname where the vector store is running. Since we are running it locally, we specify a
  value of `localhost`. If you build the AI service into an image and run it in Docker or Podman as well, you will need
  to specify the hostname or IP address of your local machine.
- `vector.store.port`: The port that the vector store is listening on. We will specify this when we run the database
  container.
- `vector.store.database`: The name of the database in the vector store.
- `vector.store.username`: The username used to connect to the vector store.
- `vector.store.password`: The password used to connect to the vector store.
- `vector.store.dimension`: The size of the embeddings that will be stored in the vector store. The value is the size of
  the vectors generated by the
  [all-minilm-l6-v2](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2){target="_blank"} embedding model.

### Implementing the vector store

Now let's create the `PgVectorEmbeddingStore` bean. ==Create the
`dev.langchain4j.workshop.PgVectorEmbeddingStoreProducer` class with the following content:==

```java title="PgVectorEmbeddingStoreProducer.java"
--8<-- "../../section-1/step-06/src/main/java/dev/langchain4j/workshop/PgVectorEmbeddingStoreProducer.java"
```

This class simply creates an instance of the `PgVectorEmbeddingStore` bean using the properties that we defined in the
`bootstrap.properties` file above.

Note that the `produceEmbeddingStore` method is annotated with the `@Produces` annotation. This means that our AI
service will use the `PgVectorEmbeddingStore` bean created by the `produceEmbeddingStore` method whenever it needs to
inject a bean `EmbeddingStore<TextSegment>`.

Also note that the we specify that the bean should use the `embeddings` table to store and retrieve embeddings.

## Updating the ingestor

Now that we have implemented our vector store, we need to update our document ingestor to use it instead of the
_in memory_ vector store. Modify the `RAGDocumentIngestor` as follows:

```java hl_lines="8-9" title="RAGDocumentIngestor.java"
--8<-- "../../section-1/step-06/src/main/java/dev/langchain4j/workshop/RAGDocumentIngestor.java:ingestor"
```

Note that we do not need to modify the configuration for our content retriever. The 
`src/main/resources/META-INF/microprofile-config.properties` file specifies that our `doc-retriever` bean should use
the default (unqualified) CDI bean for the embedding store. This will now be the the `PgVectorEmbeddingStore` bean.


```properties
dev.langchain4j.cdi.plugin.doc-retriever.config.embeddingStore=lookup:@default
```

## Testing the application

Let's see if everything works as expected.

!!! important "Podman or Docker"
    The application requires Podman or Docker to run a PostgreSQL database.
    So make sure you have one of them installed and running.

First, you need to run the vector store inside Docker or Podman. To start it, run one of the following commands,
depending on the environment that you use:

- Docker:

    ```shell
    docker run -d --name postgres -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password -p 5432:5432 pgvector/pgvector:pg17
    ```

- Podman:

    ```shell
    podman run -d --name postgres -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=password -p 5432:5432 pgvector/pgvector:pg17
    ```

Before running the AI service, check that the vector store is running and that the database is clean. Connect to the
`postgres` database using one of the following commands:

- Docker:

    ```shell
    docker exec -ti postgres psql -h localhost -p 5432 postgres -U postgres -d postgres
    ```

- Podman:

    ```shell
    podman exec -ti postgres psql -h localhost -p 5432 postgres -U postgres -d postgres
    ```

This will run the `psql` command line and connect you to the `postgres` database. You should see the following output
in your terminal:

```shell
psql (17.9 (Debian 17.9-1.pgdg12+1))
Type "help" for help.

postgres=#
```

You can check that there are currently no tables in the database using the `\dt` command:

```shell
postgres=# \dt
Did not find any relations.
```

> 🛠 Troubleshooting – Docker Permission Issue on Linux

If you see this error when running the project:
```
DOCKER_HOST unix:///var/run/docker.sock is not listening:
java.net.BindException: Permission denied
```
It means your user doesn't have access to the Docker socket (`/var/run/docker.sock`).

> ✅ Solutions

**Quick fix (⚠️ not recommended for production):**

```bash
sudo chmod 777 /var/run/docker.sock
```
This grants full access to all users. Use only in local/dev environments.

**Recommended fix:**
Add your user to the docker group:

```bash
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
```

After adding your user to the Docker group, don't forget to log out and back in for the changes to take effect.


Now that you have confirmed that the vector store is running, you need to start the AI service. ==If you stopped the
application, restart it with the following command in a **different terminal window**:==

```shell
./mvnw liberty:dev
```

**When the application starts, it will ingest the documents into the vector store.**

You should still see the following lines in the log that indicate that documents are
being ingested. The difference now is that the documents are being ingested into the external vector store rather than
the _in memory_ vector store.

```bash
[INFO] INFO ai.djl.util.Platform -- Found matching platform from: wsjar:file:/Users/msmiths/.m2/repository/ai/djl/huggingface/tokenizers/0.36.0/tokenizers-0.36.0.jar!/native/lib/tokenizers.properties
[INFO] DEBUG ai.djl.huggingface.tokenizers.jni.LibUtils -- Using cache dir: /Users/msmiths/.djl.ai/tokenizers/0.21.0-0.36.0-cpu-osx-aarch64
[INFO] DEBUG ai.djl.huggingface.tokenizers.jni.LibUtils -- Loading huggingface library from: /Users/msmiths/.djl.ai/tokenizers/0.21.0-0.36.0-cpu-osx-aarch64
[INFO] DEBUG ai.djl.huggingface.tokenizers.jni.LibUtils -- Loading native library: /Users/msmiths/.djl.ai/tokenizers/0.21.0-0.36.0-cpu-osx-aarch64/libtokenizers.dylib
[INFO] INFO dev.langchain4j.liberty.workshop.producers.PgVectorEmbeddingStoreProducer -- Creating PgVector EmbeddingStore
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Starting to ingest 1 documents
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Documents were split into 39 text segments
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Starting to embed 39 text segments
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Finished embedding 39 text segments
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Starting to store 39 text segments into the embedding store
[INFO] DEBUG dev.langchain4j.store.embedding.EmbeddingStoreIngestor -- Finished storing 39 text segments into the embedding store
[INFO] INFO dev.langchain4j.workshop.RAGDocumentIngestor -- Ingested 1 docs in 167ms
```

To verify this, return to the terminal window that is connected to the vector store database and run the `\dt` command
again to list the tables in the `postgres` database:

```shell
postgres=# \dt
           List of relations
 Schema |    Name    | Type  |  Owner   
--------+------------+-------+----------
 public | embeddings | table | postgres
(1 row)
```

You can see that an `embeddings` table has been created.

Now verify that the table contains the expected number of embeddings. From the logs above, you should expect to find
`39` embeddings (segments) in the `embeddings` table. Run the following command to verify this:

```shell
postgres=# select count(*) from embeddings;
 count 
-------
    39
(1 row)
```

Let's test with the chatbot. ==Open your browser and go to [http://localhost:9080](http://localhost:9080). Ask the
question to the chatbot and see if it retrieves the relevant segments and builds a cohesive answer:==

```
What can you tell me about your cancellation policy?
```

## Conclusion

In this step, modified our RAG implementation to store the embeddings in an external vector store.

In the [next step](./step-07.md) let's switch to another very popular pattern when using LLMs: Function Calls and Tools.
